viii VERG. AEN. X.

and lands in Latium. The king of this country was
Latinus, the hand of whose daughter Lavinia, Turnus,
prince of the Rutulians, was seeking in marriage,
and the queen mother Amata favoured his suit. But
the alliance was forbidden by portentS, while on the
other hand an omen on their arrival signified that
the Trojans had found the land of promise. Ac-
cordingly Latinus received them hospitably, and
plighted Lavinia to Aeneas. Juno, however, who
was always hostile to the Trojans, tried to prevent
the marriage, and sent the Fury Allecto to instigate
Turnus to make war on the strangers. This he did,
and gathered the surrounding tribes to help him.
Thereupon Aeneas secured the alliance of Evander,
king of Pallanteum, an Arcadian settler in Italy.
Evander sent him to ask the help of the Etrurians,
then in armed revolt against their cruel king Me-
zentius, who had fied to Latinus. Aeneas went to
Tarchon, the principal chieftain of the Etrurians,
and was successful in securing the Etrurian alliance.
Meanwhile the Trojans, who had been left under
Iulus in Latium, had been attacked by Turnus, and
were besieged in their camp. This book opens with
the return of Aeneas from Etruria. In the subse-
quent two books the story is continued, and ends
with the killing of Turnus by Aeneas, who then
married Lavinia and settled in Latium. The chief
interest of their national epic, the Aeneid, to the
Romans was that it gave the history of the mythical

